So far, we've always been running gradient descent using a fixed learning rate.
So that means that the learning rate was constant.
Now of course, we did a couple of experiments where we systematically varied the learning rate, but
that was changing the learning rate for different runs through the gradient descent for loop.
So looping over all the training epochs.
But within gradient descent, when going through that for loop, the learning rate was always the same.
So the goal of this code challenge is to explore ways of changing the learning rate.
So we are going to make the learning rate be dynamic.
That means the learning rate is going to be different at each iteration through that for loop that goes
over gradient descent.
So in particular here is your mission for this code challenge.
What you want to do is start from the code gradient descent in one dimension.
So that was from the I think that was the first coding video in this section.
And make a copy of this notebook.
So you don't want to overwrite your the previous notebook, make a copy of this into a new file.
And then you want to come up with a way to change the learning rate in the middle of gradient descent,
so that during the learning algorithm, the learning rate is changing.
Here I have provided four possibilities for ways to change the learning rate.
You don't have to use all four of these, you can just pick one.
Or maybe you can do two if you like.
You don't have to do all of these.
These are just for your inspiration.
Now I am actually going to do two of these.
I'm not going to tell you which two.
Now I will explain that in the code.
So pick one of these four.
Or you know, if you think of your own way to change the learning rate, that's also okay.
and implement this in the code.
And then it's also useful to compare this against a fixed learning rate.
So that can be basically just the same thing we did in this code file originally.
Then you might want to spend some time thinking critically about how your choice of how the learning
rate changes over the course of learning might fail.
So what are the advantages and disadvantages of each of them?
Now, I encourage you now to pause the video and switch to Python and start coding.
When you're ready, come back to the video because not only am I going to show you my solution, I'm
also going to.
After I go through the code, I'm going to come back to the lecture.
There's going to be more material about the advantages and disadvantages of different methods of changing
the learning rate dynamically.
All right.
Good luck.
I hope you enjoy this and I'll see you when you come back to the video.
So we begin by importing numpy and matplotlib.
Here I create the function and its derivative.
This is exactly the same as several videos ago with the one dimensional function.
Okay, so I did three.
I took three different approaches here.
The first one is gradient descent using a fixed learning rate.
Now this is actually really no different from the code you have seen now several times before.
A couple of minor changes.
I decreased the the training epochs to 50 and all of this code here.
This is all the this is the gradient descent algorithm in here.
I just expanded it a little bit to add some comments here.
So here we compute the gradient.
Here we update the the parameter the estimate of the function minimum according to standard vanilla
gradient descent.
So the parameter equals itself minus the gradient times the learning rate.
And now here I have this code line actually doesn't do anything.
This is a this I specify the learning rate up here and then I just repeat it over here.
The point of me including this here is just to set you up for what the code is going to look like in
the next section.
So in the future, when we get down here in the next section, I'm going to be modifying the learning
rate on each step, each iteration through training in gradient descent.
But for now, this is just here to prepare you for the future.
Okay.
And then here at the end we store all the parameters.
You can see I'm calling this matrix of results model params fixed because the model the learning rate
here is fixed.
And yeah then we're storing at each iteration through training we're storing the estimate the local
min the derivative and the learning rate.
Okay.
So let me run this cell here.
And then we go to the next code cell where I use gradient descent using.
I call this a gradient based learning rate.
Now most of the code here is identical to the previous code that I just showed you.
The only difference is well, I guess there's two differences.
One is the variable name for storing the results of course is different, but the important difference
is that I'm changing the learning rate.
So now the learning rate equals itself times the gradient that I just computed.
So times the derivative.
So the learning rate is scaled by the derivative.
And I take the absolute value here.
That's because if this derivative happens to be negative we get a negative gradient here.
Then the learning rate switches to be negative which means that it's going to start searching for.
It's going to start implementing gradient ascent and not gradient descent.
So that's that's wrong.
So so we just multiply by the the magnitude of the gradient.
Now why is this a sensible thing to do.
And what is the effect of this?
Well, the idea here is that when we are very far away from the minimum, the function minimum, the
gradient is relatively large.
So then the gradient is relatively large, which means that we are far away from where we need to be.
So that means the learning rate is relatively larger.
Conversely, the closer we get to the actual function minimum, the gradient gets closer and closer
to zero.
It might be negative or it might be positive, but the magnitude of the gradient is getting smaller
and smaller.
It's getting closer to zero.
So that means that the effective learning rate that we use in gradient descent actually decreases.
The learning rate is going to go towards zero as the gradient gets smaller.
So that's a pretty useful concept in deep learning that the learning rate should be larger the further
you are away from the final solution, and it should get smaller as you get closer to a good minimum.
A good solution.
We I'm going to talk a lot more about that in the future here.
In this video I'm just introducing you to the basic concept of that.
Okay.
Very nice.
So, uh, run this code, save those results.
And then finally I'm using gradient descent.
Dynamic gradient descent using a time based learning rate.
So what does that mean.
So here again is pretty much all the same code.
I'm starting the learning rate at 0.1 in this case.
Now I've removed all of the extra lines and comments.
So.
But otherwise this is the same lines of code that you've seen several times before.
So we get the gradient and here we update the parameter.
And now here I'm setting the learning rate to be the initially defined learning rate times this business
here.
So what is going on here.
Well here I'm saying one minus.
And then this is a a separate term here.
So one minus the current training epoch divided by the total number of training epochs.
So when when we first start the the training here I is zero or I is some, you know some small number.
And this is going to be some, you know, some small number 01234 divided by 50.
So this ends up being a very small number and we subtract that off of one.
So this whole term here ends up being something very close to one.
So at the beginning of learning the effective learning rate is very close to 0.1.
And now what happens as we get later and later in learning as we move through learning, learning progresses.
This looping index increases.
We get higher and higher closer to the number 50.
And that means that this ratio here gets closer and closer to one.
Right.
Because we're dividing the current index by the total number of training epochs.
This gets close to one.
And then we subtract that off.
So that means that this quantity is getting closer to zero, which means that the effective learning
rate is decreasing as the learning increases.
So you can see that this method here adjusting the learning rate according to the time or training epoch.
And this method up here of adjusting the learning rate according to the gradient.
They both have a similar effect, which is to decrease the learning rate as learning progresses and
the mechanism is slightly different.
Okay.
Very nice.
Let's see.
Run this code.
And now we get to plot the results.
And here you see the results appearing here.
Okay so we have these three plots here showing the local minimum.
So this is our estimate showing the derivative here and showing the learning rate over training epochs
or iterations.
And then blue is for the fixed learning rate you can see the learning rate doesn't change here.
The blue line.
And then orange is the gradient based learning rate and green is the time based learning rate.
So what are we looking for here.
Well we are looking for this to go to zero because we want the derivative to be very close to zero ideally
exactly zero.
So in this case it looks like the time based learning rate won the race.
It got there the fastest.
And in fact it looks like you know we for this particular case we could have stopped after ten training
epochs with our time based learning rate.
Similarly here with the looking at the actual function minimum it should be 0.5.
You'll remember that from a couple videos ago.
0.5 is the the theoretical value, the analytic value.
And you see that not only does the time based learning rate get there first, it also gets it's also
the most accurate even after 50 training iterations.
Now the reason why this learning rate here is or sorry.
The parameter here for the fixed learning rate starts negative is because we initialized all three of
the experiments to have different random starting values.
So in fact what I'm going to do now is rerun all the code in this entire notebook.
And to do that you know, you don't need to go through every single thing and press Ctrl enter on the
keyboard and so on.
There's a keyboard shortcut to run the entire notebook, all of the code in the notebook, and you do
that by on Windows and Linux, it's control and then F9.
So you press the Ctrl key and then press F9.
I don't know what it is offhand on a mac, but it's going to be something similar.
You can find out actually by going clicking on runtime and you say run all this is the equivalent menu
option.
Okay.
So anyway, I've run it again and again.
We see that the starting locations are different for the three different experiments because they all
start off being randomly selected.
But in this case, it still seems like the time based learning rate algorithm is the best.
It seems to get the most accurate result and the fastest.
Now, there's a few potential issues with this experiment that we can explore, that you will explore
when you go through these additional explorations.
So I definitely encourage you to go through these four additional explorations here.
What I want to do is spend a little bit of time summarizing what we've discovered, and building up
some theory that we are going to get into more detail about later in the course.
So possible ways to proportionate the learning rate or make the learning rate be dynamic over the course
of the experiment.
One which you saw is using the training epochs.
So basically the more you go through learning, the smaller the learning rate becomes.
This is a good method.
It's often done.
It's typically done in blocks.
So not in every single learning rate, but let's say every you know or sorry, not on every single epoch
the learning rate changes, but let's say every ten epochs or every 20 epochs, you would make the learning
rate a little bit smaller.
So this is a good method.
It's pretty frequently done.
A main disadvantage is that it's totally unrelated to the model performance.
So the learning rate is changing, but not as a function of how the model is actually learning.
So then there's another method which I showed you and that is setting or modulating the learning rate
according to the derivative or the gradient.
This is useful because it's adaptive to the problem, but it does require some additional parameters
and sometimes it requires appropriate scaling.
Simply multiplying the gradient by the learning rate by the gradient happen to work well.
In this case you can imagine if the derivative were some large number like four or 10 or 100, then
we could actually be possibly even increasing the learning rate above one instead of decreasing the
learning rate.
So it requires appropriate scaling.
Okay.
And then you can.
So I haven't talked a whole lot about loss functions yet.
But essentially the loss is the difference between what we know is the correct answer and what the model
produces.
This is something we learn about in supervised learning.
So loss is also a useful way to modify the learning rate because it's adaptive to the problem.
But this also requires some scaling.
And then finally the current minimum value.
This is actually it sounds initially like it might be a good idea because it's also adaptive to the
model's performance.
But there's just too many assumptions.
And this tends not to be a viable solution.
Okay.
So I do want to say a few things about these first two points, because in fact, this is like industry
standard ways to change the learning rate as a function of training and model performance.
So this method here which I showed you how to implement this is called learning rate decay.
And we're going to talk more about it in the section of the course called meta parameters.
And this method here changing the learning rate according to the gradient.
This is incorporated into optimization algorithms called Rmsprop and Adam.
These are optimizers.
And you'll also learn more about this method in the section meta parameters.
So I hope you enjoyed this video and I hope you enjoyed working through the code challenge.
The main point was to introduce you to the concept that the learning rate can change over time, and
then it actually turns out to be a really powerful way to optimize deep learning.